The Lester Dent Master Plot formula
FIRST 1500 WORDS

1--First line, or as near thereto as possible, introduce the hero and
swat him with a fistful of trouble. Hint at a mystery, a menace or a
problem to be solved--something the hero has to cope with.
Neville a demon in charge of some beauracracy in hell. Somehow a person has started roaming around in hell.  They are traveling the levels.  He's up for his performance review.  He's got a rival who wants to hang all the blame on him for the trouble and tank his career. He has friends who want to help. A succubus, a torturing monster. 

The limbo region has some crazy trouble that he's got to deal with and it is NEVER an issue.

2--The hero pitches in to cope with his fistful of trouble. (He tries to
fathom the mystery, defeat the menace, or solve the problem.)
Neville starts investigating, and discovers the issues.

3--Introduce ALL the other characters as soon as possible. Bring them on
in action.
His rival wants to embarass him and arranges a performance review for his area in 1 week.  So in seven days Neville has to solve the mystery and put out all the... emergencies.

4--Hero's endevours land him in an actual physical conflict near the end
of the first 1500 words.
Neville discovers the limbo folks trying to rebel - storm the gates or the ferry or something.  He has to trick them into submission.  He is somehow in danger from them.

5--Near the end of first 1500 words, there is a complete surprise twist in
the plot development.
Who inspired them?  Turns out there is a pair of travellers undermining the traditions of hell.  Hell doesn't have travellers.  WTF.

SO FAR: Does it have SUSPENSE?
Is there a MENACE to the hero?
Does everything happen logically?

At this point, it might help to recall that action should do something
besides advance the hero over the scenery. Suppose the hero has learned
the dastards of villains have seized somebody named Eloise, who can
explain the secret of what is behind all these sinister events. The hero
corners villains, they fight, and villains get away. Not so hot.

Hero should accomplish something with his tearing around, if only to
rescue Eloise, and surprise! Eloise is a ring-tailed monkey. The hero
counts the rings on Eloise's tail, if nothing better comes to mind.
They're not real. The rings are painted there. Why?


SECOND 1500 WORDS

1--Shovel more grief onto the hero.
So now that the travellers are discovered, they are headed deeper into hell.  One of the circles is getting disrupted.  They are gaining allies.  He comes up with a daring plan to get the succubus, one of his friends, to join the travellers as a follower and disrupt them.  

The performance review timeframe is finalized.  It coincides with the tour of one of the Princes of Hell who is touring his region and working through each area.
There is some tradition associated with the tour where he has to produce a gift or a show or something and he can't because of the disruption that the travellers are causing.


2--Hero, being heroic, struggles, and his struggles lead up to:


3--Another physical conflict.
He works through the show or gift and somehow turns the strange disruption into a positive.  It works!  but he's asked to provide something that contradicts the whole thing.  The rival has a better whatever! 


4--A surprising plot twist to end the 1500 words.
His friend the succubus turns against him!  She betrays him!  Or maybe that happens later!

NOW: Does second part have SUSPENSE?
Does the MENACE grow like a black cloud?
Is the hero getting it in the neck?
Is the second part logical?

DON'T TELL ABOUT IT***Show how the thing looked. This is one of the
secrets of writing; never tell the reader--show him. (He trembles,
roving eyes, slackened jaw, and such.) MAKE THE READER SEE HIM.

When writing, it helps to get at least one minor surprise to the printed
page. It is reasonable to to expect these minor surprises to sort of
inveigle the reader into keeping on. They need not be such profound
efforts. One method of accomplishing one now and then is to be gently
misleading. Hero is examining the murder room. The door behind him begins
slowly to open. He does not see it. He conducts his examination
blissfully. Door eases open, wider and wider, until--surprise! The glass
pane falls out of the big window across the room. It must have fallen
slowly, and air blowing into the room caused the door to open. Then what
the heck made the pane fall so slowly? More mystery.

Characterizing a story actor consists of giving him some things
which make him stick in the reader's mind. TAG HIM.

BUILD YOUR PLOTS SO THAT ACTION CAN BE CONTINUOUS.


THIRD 1500 WORDS

1--Shovel the grief onto the hero.

2--Hero makes some headway, and corners the villain or somebody in:

3--A physical conflict.

4--A surprising plot twist, in which the hero preferably gets it in the
neck bad, to end the 1500 words.

DOES: It still have SUSPENSE?
The MENACE getting blacker?
The hero finds himself in a hell of a fix?
It all happens logically?

These outlines or master formulas are only something to make you certain of
inserting some physical conflict, and some genuine plot twists, with a little
suspense and menace thrown in. Without them, there is no pulp story.

These physical conflicts in each part might be DIFFERENT, too. If one
fight is with fists, that can take care of the pugilism until next the
next yarn. Same for poison gas and swords. There may, naturally, be
exceptions. A hero with a peculiar punch, or a quick draw, might use it
more than once.

The idea is to avoid monotony.

ACTION:
Vivid, swift, no words wasted. Create suspense, make the reader see and
feel the action.

ATMOSPHERE:
Hear, smell, see, feel and taste.

DESCRIPTION:
Trees, wind, scenery and water.

THE SECRET OF ALL WRITING IS TO MAKE EVERY WORD COUNT.


FOURTH 1500 WORDS

1--Shovel the difficulties more thickly upon the hero.

2--Get the hero almost buried in his troubles. (Figuratively, the villain
has him prisoner and has him framed for a murder rap; the girl is
presumably dead, everything is lost, and the DIFFERENT murder method is
about to dispose of the suffering protagonist.)

3--The hero extricates himself using HIS OWN SKILL, training or brawn.

4--The mysteries remaining--one big one held over to this point will help
grip interest--are cleared up in course of final conflict as hero takes
the situation in hand.

5--Final twist, a big surprise, (This can be the villain turning out to be
the unexpected person, having the "Treasure" be a dud, etc.)

6--The snapper, the punch line to end it.

HAS: The SUSPENSE held out to the last line?
The MENACE held out to the last?
Everything been explained?
It all happen logically?
Is the Punch Line enough to leave the reader with that WARM FEELING?
Did God kill the villain? Or the hero?
